# State of New Hampshire v. John Doyle

- Docket: 2024-0518
- Argument date: 2026-01-27
- Vimeo: https://vimeo.com/1158860242
- Transcript status: machine-generated draft

## Transcript

**Justice**: This is case 2024-0518, state of New Hampshire versus John Doyle. Good afternoon. Good afternoon, Mayor. Please, the court. My name is Thomas Barnard. I represent John Doyle. I've reserved two minutes for rebuttal. Part 1 Article 2B heightened the standard that a litigant must meet in order to pierce the privileges. As this court held in Zarella, that constitutional provision favors non-production and non-disclosure. Here, the state had to meet the essential needs standard, which has two components. A compelling justification and a showing that the targeted information is not available from another source. I plan to make three points this afternoon. First, there was no compelling justification to pierce the privileges. Second, the targeted information was available from another source. And third, even if there was an essential need, the trial court was required to conduct in Canberra review. Even before Part 1 Article 2B was enacted, this court's cases established that a litigant must present a case-specific justification to pierce the privilege. Here, the state advanced no case-specific justification. Should the trial court have addressed the waiver issue first? Not necessarily. I mean, I think it was within the trial court's discretion to address the essential need argument and having addressed that, not to address the waiver. It's unfortunate. It may result in more delay. Well, can we decide that issue as a manner of law? The waiver argument? Yes. Yeah. I don't think there is much merit at all for the waiver argument. A defendant does not waive the privileges merely because his lawyer raises competence as an issue. Lawyers ethically require to raise competence as an issue for one. And the second point I would make is that when a lawyer raises competence, the lawyer isn't making a claim that the client isn't confident. They're simply saying, I have a bona fide doubt this is an issue. The lawyer might raise competence and then argue that the client is confident. I've had several clients who I have raised the claim but then argue that the client is confident because that's the client's objective. Here, Lampinianio testified that he wanted Doyle's records merely because he wants the records of everyone he evaluates. There was no case-specific justification. And there could not be here. Motion for non-emergency civil commitment must allege two things. First, a current mental illness. And second, a recent dangerous act. When the trial court here granted the state's motion for Doyle's records, those records were over five years old. And the most recent allegation of any dangerous act was also more than five years old. So if the state was in a position where it could not, regardless of the content of the records, file a petition, a successful petition for non-emergency civil commitment, then by definition it could have no essential need for Doyle's records. The targeted information was not available from another source. The state already had reports from three more recent psychiatric evaluations, two of which... Can you address the preservation issue? Sure. On the unavailability from another source, sure. So the preservation requirement applies to issues. It does not apply to specific arguments. If it were otherwise, then a litigant on appeal would be limited to just parroting the arguments that were made below. And that wouldn't be helpful to this court, and it wouldn't be helpful to resolve the issues. The issue of whether the state satisfied the essential need test was clearly preserved. Two of the psychological evaluations summarized the relevant portions of the records at issue that the state sought. But Lampiniano admitted that he failed to conduct a thorough review of those evaluations. Now the state argues that in general, primary records are preferable to summaries, but as this court has held, invasion of the privilege can never be justified just because a patient's medical records might be the best evidence of the targeted information. Finally, even if there was an essential need, the trial court was required to conduct in-camera review. Under Zarella, the disclosure of records to a litigant is a distinct issue from the production of those records to the court for in-camera review. And this court has repeatedly held that trial courts must conduct in-camera review before disclosing confidential records. And the reason is obvious, as this court recognized in Zarella, much of what a physician learns from his patient may be both embarrassing and of little real consequence to society. Doyle's records here from 2016 to 2019 surely contained at least some information that was completely irrelevant to the question of whether in 2024 he suffered from a current mental illness or had committed a recent dangerous act. I have exhausted my comments. Unless the court has questions, I would wave the balance. Well, do you have a plain error argument if we conclude that the second part of the analysis is not preserved? Yes. I mean, for the reasons I've said, I do think it's preserved. If the court concludes that that component of the issue is not preserved, I do think it satisfies the plain error standards. These records, these evaluations from the OFE and from Doyle's retained expert were part of the record. The court was aware of them. They were the whole basis for the court's findings of the incompetence and lack of being restored and dangerous. So the court should have been well aware that the records at issue were thoroughly and completely summarized within those evaluations. The state suggests, as I understand it, that the applicable standard of review is unsustainable exercise of discretion. This is basically the admission of evidence. I think the standard of review is mixed. In terms of factual findings, certainly the standard of review is an unsustainable exercise of discretion. A big part of the basis of Doyle's claim is Part 1 Article 2B of the New Hampshire constitutional issues are reviewed de novo. So to the extent that the trial court's ruling here reflects an interpretation of Part 1 Article 2B, to the extent it reflects interpretations of law on the meaning of the essential need test, that review is de novo. And to the extent that the trial court's findings regarding a compelling justification or unavailability from another source reflect factual findings, those factual findings are not sustainable even under a deferential standard. What's your perspective on the fact in terms of the in-camera review? The fact that the records went to the expert, not the parties, and or that the trial court essentially said, I don't really know what I'm looking at or words to that effect. Yeah, yeah. So the fact that it went to the expert and not the parties, I don't think changes the analysis. The expert here was selected by the state and was, for all intents and purposes, a state agent. A disclosure of an alleged victim's privileged records to the defense attorney, that implicates that person's constitutional rights to privacy and their privileges even if there's a court order that would only be disclosed to the attorney, the agent of the party, and not the party him or herself. The second part of your question concerned the technical nature of the records. Privilege records are almost always technical, but a trial court's obligation to conduct in-camera review exists regardless of the technical nature of the records. McDonald involved over 2,000 pages of medical and mental health records. CT involved toxicology and medical reports. Desclose involved all the plaintiffs' psychiatric and psychological records. Paying involved medical records. And the reason that the court is still competent to conduct this review is because as this court held in refossey, the condition of dangerousness for purposes of civil commitment is not a medical concept but rather a legal one. Which are going to be different if Mr. Dull had retained an expert who then reviewed the records in order to form an opinion as to his position with respect to dangerousness, with the state being entitled to that information, is that what the case? And then presented that expert's testimony in court? Yes. Then in that circumstance, I think the waiver argument would be much stronger than it is here. Unless the court has further questions. Thank you. Thank you for your minutes.

**Counsel**: Good afternoon, and may it please the court, Adriana McCullough for the State of New Hampshire. I'd like to start by pointing out to this court that the state does not disagree that Part 1 Article 2B applies to the defendant's medical records. But this court held in Zarella, and in the other cases about essential need, that when the state wants to pierce a defendant's or a witness's or a victim's physician-patient privilege to review medical records, that the test this court uses to determine if that privilege can be pierced is the essential need test. And that's exactly what happened here when this court remanded this case for review by the trial court. The trial court held a hearing at which the state presented evidence, establishing that there was an essential need for that particular physician, Dr. Lampagnano, to review the defendant's medical and mental health records, that the OFE had and that Dr. Goudry had to determine if that physician could certify him to begin the probate process of being involuntarily committed for treatment based on his dangerousness finding, that the trial court had made prior to this hearing. Isn't Judge St. Hillar's order really a per se order and under these circumstances, these records are always going to be an essential need for the state whenever they seek to civilly

**Justice**: commit somebody on that basis?

**Counsel**: It is not because the trial court had to make specific factual findings to issue that order. The state did not ask the trial court at that hearing to hold that in every case going forward, these sorts of evaluations require the trial court to provide the records to the state, and the state is not asking this court to hold that on appeal. But isn't that sort of embedded in what was presented to the trial court that this is, it's essentially the standard of care requires a full record review. So isn't Judge St. Hillar's question

**Justice**: that always going to apply?

**Counsel**: I can't say, and that's because it will depend on whatever physician is testifying or whatever evidence is presented at that hearing.

**Justice**: Does the standard of care deviate?

**Counsel**: Typically no, although I think in recent news we see that the standard of, for example, vaccines can change based on who is in the federal government and so I could, it is possible that the standard of care for psychiatric and law evaluations could change in the future. It certainly hasn't changed as far as I know, and I would imagine that any evaluator would testify at a hearing that the best source of information about the defendant's medical and mental health would be from his medical records. However, there... So it is per se. But no one is asking this court to hold that. And if that, I mean, I guess on some level, yes. Would it be elevating form over substance to have an evidentiary hearing every single time the state needs medical records

**Justice**: to do one of these evaluations?

**Counsel**: Perhaps. However, as this court has acknowledged in Zarela and as the defendant certainly argues here, these records are protected under the Constitution and they're protected by two separate statutes. And so I don't know that it's elevating form over substance if this sort of hearing ensures that the court and the state and the defense attorney, if he doesn't have the records either, are not piercing a defendant's privilege unnecessarily. And so this is that safeguard. You don't need to... For the state to be successful in this appeal, this court does not need to hold that in every hearing like this going forward, the records must be disclosed. I see why it feels that way, but you don't have to decide that. In this case, there was evidence presented that there was an essential need for these records based on evidence about there being a compelling justification from these records. As you pointed out, Justice MacDonald, it is about this being the adequate standard of care to perform one of these evaluations. But the other piece of that that Dr. Lampagnano talked about was that psychiatric conditions can wax and wane over time. And that is something that the records would be the best source of information for. When compared at least minimally to the defendant's self-report, especially in these evaluations. I don't know... I know that we've provided in our appendices the various evaluations that the defendant went through, but he does provide some self-reporting about his own mental health experiences. And some of those are corroborated by the medical records and some of that information is not. And honestly, in Dr. Gujri's summary, which I know I may be getting into my second argument too early, but in Dr. Gujri's summary of these records, she doesn't make clear what is a self-report from the defendant versus what is present in the medical records versus what is something she observed during the evaluation. And so having Dr. Lampagnano have the ability to review these other psychiatric records could tell him what is something the defendant self-reported in these evaluations or in his own evaluation with the defendant and what is or is not supported in that self-evaluation by the records. But he acknowledged that he hadn't read those competency reports.

**Justice**: So isn't that speculative?

**Counsel**: He hadn't read them at the time of the hearing. Presumably he would have read them if that was all he had to do this evaluation. And the state had made it so that he could have those evaluations to conduct his evaluation. But I think, based on his testimony, he would have preferred to have the records at the same time that he was reviewing those evaluations to do what I've just described, which is to compare the self-reports that the defendant gives to him and to these other evaluators alongside the medical records to see what the defendant's own interpretation of his mental health and dangerousness is in comparison to what other professionals have seen in these admittedly short bursts of time that they've been able to evaluate him or observe him. Do we know what Dr. Guidry reviewed

**Justice**: when assessing the defendant's storability?

**Counsel**: I know some of them off the top of my head. They are listed in her report very specifically, but she had records that the OFE did not even had. She had the River Bend records from the restoration period, which the OFE had, and she also had records from his time at Concord Hospital where he was, I think he was held there for about 10 days while they were trying to get him into a bed at New Hampshire Hospital in their psychiatric unit. I'm not sure because I haven't seen these records, but I think it's a 10-day span of time. She had those. The OFE did not have those when it did. I think it's a 10-day span of time that she was able to evaluate him and observe him and observe him. I think it's a 10-day span of time that she was able to evaluate him based on its summary of the records and what it listed it reviewed. She already had additional records that Dr. Lampignano wanted, because from his perspective, that would have also given a very clear picture from 2019 into 2020 of the defendant's mental health closest in time to when he was doing his evaluation. Dr. Barnard, well, to answer your question first, the state's position would be that the defendant has waived the privilege to all of these records. However, if you or if this court would like to determine the outcome of this case based on that argument, the state would request an opportunity to brief that issue. The state did not brief that issue in this particular brief based on the arguments that were made in the defendant's brief and based on the order that the trial court wrote. So do you think we can review that

**Justice**: or do we need to send it back to the superior court?

**Counsel**: Frankly, I do think you would need to send it back to the superior court because your job as the appellate court would be to review his order on that particular issue based on the facts that were developed at that hearing. So I would imagine part of the state's brief would say you need to remand it first to have him or have the judge in that court issue an order on that particular argument before this court can decide, as a matter of law or as a matter of fact that this defendant has waived to these records by providing it to these other people. But certainly the state made that argument at the trial court down below. And I know that this court instructed the trial court to find both that and essential need when it remanded it the first time. Anyway, in terms of the unavailable from another source the state does believe that this should be reviewed under plain error because it is not preserved for review. There is a distinction between preserving issues for appeal and arguments for appeal. Well, the trial court addressed availability

**Justice**: of the records, did he not?

**Counsel**: He did, but not based on this specific argument that there were summaries of the records provided in these reports that Dr. Lampagnano had had. I know that Dr. Lampagnano testified he had not thoroughly reviewed those reports but I don't believe anyone asked him if he had reviewed minimally the summaries or if he knew what records were even potentially available to him from or about the defendant. And neither party argued to the trial court about whether these summaries were or were not an alternative source of this information. And so for this court to find that at the first instance based on no facts presented about that at the hearing and no arguments made about that at the hearing would not be appropriate in this context given that you are reviewing for an unsustainable exercise of discretion in the trial court's order. So if this court does review that under plain error this error was not plain because I already sort of talked about this so I apologize for being out of order but these summaries are not an adequate or an alternative source of this information. As I explained the OFE did not even have any records for the defendant when it conducted its competency evaluation in the beginning of this whole process. And that evaluator wrote many times in her report that if I received those reports or those records my outcome or my opinion could change. And she based basically her entire findings on his self-reporting and how he presented in that evaluation. By the time we were at the restoration evaluation she did have records from Riverbend but they were only from that years long period of his restoration so none of the records before his competency was raised. Dr. Gujri's summary appears to talk about his records from 2016 through 2019 and then his Riverbend records during the restoration period in these 10 days of records from Concord Hospital. So her summary is more robust because she had more information but as I've already sort of pointed out she draws medical conclusions about the defendant that it's unclear what the source of that is from. It's unclear if she's referring to records where other professionals saw that information or if she's taking that from his self-report and some of those conclusions such as him she finds at one point that he says jail is a deterrent to me so I won't be violent. It's unclear if he just said that to her in the evaluation if that's something that a medical professional at one of these other places found to be true or if he said that to somebody else versus Dr. Gujri.

**Justice**: Can you address the in-camera review issue?

**Counsel**: Yes. So in this particular case there are two reasons why the trial court did not need to do an in-camera review in this context. One of them is that this court has held that the purpose of an in-camera review is to ensure that irrelevant or non-responsive records are not disclosed to the parties. And while it is true in this case that Dr. Lampignano was the state's expert, this trial court had also ordered that the state was not permitted to see any of the defendant's medical records throughout this entire process. So the state never saw the records that Dr. Gujri or the OFE used to conduct their evaluations and examinations and the court had prevented the state from getting these records when it also prevented Dr. Lampignano from having them initially in the beginning before we got all the way where we are now. And even in this order that the trial court issued the state would never have seen those medical records without filing its own motion, arguing there was an essential need for it to see the records. So in that context these records were not going to the parties. They were going to the OFE. I mean to Dr. Lampignano. And the second point is that these records were being used by Dr. Lampignano to make a medical finding. Granted some of those findings are rooted in case law that explain what dangerousness is and what the 135C process is but Dr. Lampignano is using them to see if the defendant had a mental health condition actively and if he was dangerous. Those are medical findings based on how the defendant has presented in front of that evaluator and over a course of time. So these for the trial court to conduct an in-camera review of records for a legal purpose. When trial courts are trained in conducting in-camera reviews to determine what is necessary for a legal purpose such as proving serious bodily injury or proving some other fact of a crime. I think one of these cases that the defense cited on the records were being used to establish legally that the victim was disabled under the AFSA statute. That is much different. Those legal conclusions or the facts that the state needs to prove a legal is different than what Dr. Lampignano is using these records for which is to determine a mental health diagnosis and dangerousness and so to expect the trial court to go through thousands of pages of records without really knowing what it's looking for would I think elevate form over substance of conducting an in-camera review in every single one of these or would require the trial court to in some way consult with the evaluator to ask the evaluator what do you need from these records to conduct

**Justice**: an evaluation that meets the standard of care?

**Counsel**: Imagine some sort of a medical issue that doesn't implicate the individuals the legal issue wouldn't there be a basis to exclude

**Justice**: those components of the record?

**Counsel**: It's possible and the defendant could certainly make that pitch at a hearing for essential need and say parts of the records that I've provided to the OFE have irrelevant information and frankly I would say but he didn't have the records his counsel didn't have the records

**Justice**: did he? Well someone had the records

**Counsel**: and I say that because Dr. Gujri points out that part of the defendant's diagnosis in his records are redacted and so I'm not I don't know if the hospital redacted those I don't know if the defendant's counsel redacted those but somebody had redacted the records that went to the OFE question the trial court have some obligation as gatekeeper in terms of redacting further privileged or private information that is not relevant to the inquiry that the doctor

**Justice**: is hired to make?

**Counsel**: Sure I mean just in general because the end camera review requires that but it is possible that even those medical diagnoses that don't have anything to do with mental health are relevant for example this defendant has medical diagnoses in addition to his mental health diagnoses that it seems in some way trigger his like the mental diagnoses that he has and so it's entirely possible that medical facts about a defendant are also relevant to their dangerousness in society based on how those interplay with his mental health or her mental health and again so to ask the trial court to do that without any knowledge from counsel without any consultation with the doctor or some other medical provider about what is and is not relevant in a psychological perspective I think is unfair for the trial court to do is inconsistent with the concept of essential need to simply release the patient's entire set of medical records because in this case excuse me doesn't the trial court have a duty to superintendent over that issue and make sure that it is in fact only the records that are essential are provided to

**Justice**: in this case the doctor? I see my red light is on but may I answer your question?

**Counsel**: Yes I think so here in this case the trial court has already sort of done that and has already limited what is essential in this context because the competency order that was originally issued in 2019 only required the defendant to provide three years of medical records that's what the state was seeking to provide to Dr. Lampignano was only what the OFE received and at that moment also the defendant had the opportunity to object to providing even those three years of records to the OFE for that evaluation and did not granted he didn't provide any records but he didn't make any objections either thank you Thank you I'd like to make one brief point about Dr. Goudry's report it was completed in July of 2020 and she only addresses the question of restoration she does not address the question of dangerousness and by the time the state first made its request for Doyle's privileged records the question of restoration had already been settled so even if even assuming that there was a waiver with respect to the restoration issue there was no waiver with respect to the dangerousness issue thank you thank you very much counsel case is submitted
