# Appeal of Stephen Verbeek & a. (New Hampshire Housing Appeals Board)

- Docket: 2025-0239
- Argument date: 2026-02-12
- Vimeo: https://vimeo.com/1164378503
- Transcript status: machine-generated draft

## Transcript

**Justice**: This is case 2025-0239, appeal of Stephen Overbeek et al. Good morning, Attorney Christensen. I think I just overheard your reserve two minutes. Yes. Please proceed. Thank you very much. Please record my name is Jeffrey Christensen. I represent Stephen and Nicole Overbeek. Well, on a property of a little over nine acres in Claremont, this property was, would it undeveloped until they built a little camper on a tiny home that they used for their own use, friends and family would come up and use it. It was essentially a vacation. Over the COVID pandemic, a few years later, they started renting it on Airbnb. They did that for about 18 months. There were no complaints, no issues. Neighbors said they didn't even know what was going on. Eventually, the town found out and told them this isn't allowed under the variance under the ordinance. You need a variance. So they applied for that variance and it was denied by the ZBA. Now, there's two issues with this case. The first is whether or not the variance should have been required in the first place. Now, the city of Claremont considered this a commercial use rather than a residential use. This is in a residential district. But under the cases that this court has issued, short-term rentals are not necessarily a commercial use. It depends on the language of the zoning ordinance in this particular town. Conway and Coogler worked with Stiff and Portsmouth that all said, look, if the town zoning ordinance for the city zoning ordinance sets a duration requirement, a limitation on what a residential use is, then this could exclude short-term rentals. There wasn't one in Conway, there wasn't one in Portsmouth. There isn't one in Claremont. There is no duration requirement for residential use. They do have a category for hotels, motels, inns, cabins, and other transient lodges. Transient lodging is not defined in the ordinance. ZDA and city staff said, we're going to treat this as another transient lodging. But this is a broad catch-all that has to be defined in relation to the other terms in this provision for hotels. So how is the short-term rental not other transient lodging? Exactly. So we've got, what is the distinguishing feature? It's not the duration requirement. We know that from the zoning ordinance. And the ZDA said, you can use this for your own short-term use. You can have friends come up and use it for a weekend, family, you can let strangers from the internet use it for a weekend, as long as money doesn't change hands. So it's not the duration, and that's consistent with Conway and Kudrick and working staff. It's not the money changing hands, however. An apartment is not a commercial use. Simply renting something to somebody else doesn't make it a commercial use. In a kilo of folks here from this court, we had a case where somebody had a camper, but they were allowed to use for their personal use. And this court said, if you can use it yourself, if you can let your friends use it, you can let people pay to use it. Even in working staff enforcement, they said, this is short-term use. Is it commercial use? It's being rented out. It is prohibited. That was a case where the property was being rented out for wedding parties or corporate events. That's a very different circumstance. That's much more similar to a hotel than somebody renting out what is essentially their vacation home. There's a big difference between renting out your vacation home when you are not personally using it or when your friends are using it, and running a hotel. What about the issue of the lot line setback? Are we talking about the boundaries between the two districts? No, my understanding is that the camper itself was not setback enough from the side lot line. Wasn't there part of a variance that requested relief from the lot line setback? No, there was a variance request because this property is split between new districts. And it was a variance to allow the cabin... So there's a camper that is currently there, and they want to build a second cabin back in the woods, in the back. This other transient lodging is allowed in the residential district. It's only allowed in the AR district, the agricultural district, within 75 feet of that boundary. They want to push it farther back because it's supposed to be a little cabin in the woods. They wanted it to feel really remote. And in this case, that was part of the appeal and part of the advantage of this, because the way in the woods the neighbors would never... So you don't disagree that they would need a variance for that? Only if it counts as other transient lodging. All of that depends on whether this is other transient lodging or simply vacation. The city said if you want to build the cabin for your own use, you can build it all the way back. The agricultural district allows residential use, and you can build that. The only thing you can't do is let somebody else use it if they give you money. That was the only part where they had an issue. But even if we assume that these variances were required, you have the issue of the hardship. Now, the one common reason for several variances all relating to the dimensional aspects of this is because short-term rentals are allowed as other transient lodgings in this district if you meet certain dimensional requirements that this one didn't need. So it's dimensional restrictions that we need to vary as it's found. And the common denominator for the denial is this property simply isn't unique. You don't have a hardship. The other two aspects of the hardship element, reasonable use, the CPA said was reasonable. Whether there's a fair and substantial relationship justifying, denying this use, they didn't find the only issue is this property unique. And here the ZBA simply applied the incorrectly of the standard. For a property to have special circumstances resulting in a hardship, it simply has to be burdened differently than all of the properties in the district. It doesn't have to be the singular, unique property. In this case it is burdened differently than all the other properties in the district. Even if we assume this is other transient lodgings, it could have had a special exception if it had the size in the frontage and location. But let's take size in the frontage. This property is large enough to qualify for other transient lodgings. It could need four acres, this has not, more than enough. But it doesn't have enough frontage. And the ZBA said, well, there are other large lodgings, so the size is not unique. There are other lodgings with small frontage, so the frontage is not unique. But there was no other lodgings that was both large and with small frontage. So this use that would have been reasonable in this property, but for the small frontage, would be allowed on those other properties. The other properties of small frontage weren't large enough to make this use reasonable. This is the only property where it could be reasonable, but it's burdened because of its large shape. It's got plenty of land in the back where you can put a little cabin in the woods. But the frontage isn't there. The frontage that is intended to say, you need this much space if you're going to operate a hotel, do you really need that much frontage for a little cabin? That's where the variance comes in. And that's where they ZBA had their second legal errors when they said, look, this is a small use, it's harmless. But we can't consider the particulars of this use. We have to treat it as if it were any other hotel, any other motel. We can't say, yeah, you don't need that much frontage for this. The fact that your property is this weird shape of a small entrance and then a large back land, doesn't matter because they couldn't put a big hotel here. But that's the exact opposite of the point of the variance. The variance is not one size fits all. It's this particular use on this particular property. So there's a second issue. Given where this property is, its characteristics, it is more burdened by this zoning order than other lots in the area. Lots that are large enough and have sufficient frontage. Lots that are within 1,000 feet of the highway. Like you might need for the traffic coming and going to a large hotel. But this camper fits two people to cabin, that two people are not going to have a lot of traffic. Would anything stop them if they received the variance and decided to remove the camper and replace it with a 5,000 square foot home? Absolutely. What would stop them? The law in New Hampshire is when you apply for a variance, you're applying for that particular use. So this variance would have been for this camper, for this cabin. Is it for the camper or for the use? The use would be this camper. A hotel, if they wanted to do that, they would have to go through them. I'm not saying a hotel. I'm saying a 5,000 square foot house. Sure. That would, if they wanted to put a 5,000 square foot house for their own personal residence, they could do that. That's permitted use. If they wanted to put one there and rent it out, that wouldn't be what they had applied for. Now, in this case, it's hard to discuss the hypothetical, but if that is just their house that they live in sometimes and they rent it out, I think that would be allowed just like on their Conway v. Kudry. There is no durational requirement. If you are treating it as a other transient lodging, then we have to look at the specifics there. But again, this property has those special characteristics. If you just put a house on it, what's the harm of somebody paying to live there for a person who owns it? What's the difference? That's what we're doing. Now, this went to the Housing Appeals Board. The Housing Appeals Board appeared to agree that there were special characteristics, but they kind of dismissed that issue and created a new basis for denial. When they said that there was no rational connection between proposed use and the provisions of the ordinance. And this creates a new element that doesn't exist in the statute. It reverses what exists in the statute. The statute says that there has to be no fair and substantial relationship in order to get there. It's the AGP said that there was a relationship that really matters when you're having neutral, harmless use on the statute. If there's no harm, great. That satisfies that element. You don't have to justify why your use supports the zoning ordinance purposes. You don't have to justify why you deserve to be able to use your property for your specific use. And there's also a reasonability question here when they say that there's no rational connection between the special characteristics of this property, its size, its frontage, its distance from the highway. And the ordinance provisions that we're seeking a variance from, like the size limitations and the frontage limitations and how far it can be from the highway, these are exactly related. And the point is that these provisions that make sense for a large hotel with multiple units with a lot of people coming back for it don't make sense for a small camper. A cabin that you can be using anything, but the same amount of traffic is going to happen either way. The same amount of people, locals, not locals, the only difference is whether or not somebody hands and forbakes $20 when they go in or out. That can't be the relevant difference under the court's case law in Kudger Newark and Stiff. There is a minimum size and there is a minimum frontage. Some properties in the area needed, this one does not. The use is reasonable. The DBA said that is an unnecessary option. These variants should be rented if it was required in the first place. Is there a reason to disallow renting out the camper simply because it does not have enough frontage to support a hotel? Certainly. The HAB's decision, the Housing Appeals Board's decision, is also contrary to the record. It went beyond the CBA's decision. As I mentioned before, hardship has three elements. The special characteristics, the reasonable use, and the lack of the justifying relationship. The ZBA only found that the special characteristics were not met. The other two were satisfied. The Housing Appeals Board said, maybe the special conditions are met, but we're going to unsatisfy one of the other elements. We're going to change the ZBA's decision on the experience of standard relationship. We're looking for a new reason to deny it for the ZBA's reasonable support. That's my top. Thank you. Thank you, Attorney Christians.

**Counsel**: May it please the court writing that Sean Tangy had a law firm called Woodson on here representing the city of San Juan and by extension, San Juan and San Juan would have adjusted. This case, like many of the other cases that you're reporting in terms of short-term rentals, begins with the analysis as to whether or not the city plan wanted purposely and expressly regulated this type of use within its own requirements. As the court noted in Conway v. Kudrick, until the legislature takes action to address this issue, it's going to result in the court having to make basically decisions on a case-by-case basis, which is going to result in certain issues being allowed in certain municipalities while in certain dignitaries. The city plan wants a position in this matter is that the case is very similar to that of the working-stift partner in the city of Portsmouth. The language is very similar in both cases and I think the intent is identical. That's what both municipalities are attempting to try to do with the use of the term other transient logic. And as I said, I'll add to the portion of the case, the city plan wants a specific term within the special exceptions themed in sports, rural residential district that can clearly be interpreted to include short-term rentals as part of the definition of other transient logic. As I indicated my brave use of the legal principle and use them generous, the proper interpretation of this term, other transient logic must be a sign that's similar and consistent interpretation as those other words used in that regulation, such as hotels, hotels and so we're basically talking about a commercial activity as it relates to this type of use. And the city was very very clear without its intention to try to capture all these types of uses over to address this in a special exception provisions for this particular district. Counts to only know the logical interpretation of this term must include use of transient use as seen in the sports book case. It is apparent that the city plan will potentially regulate the proposed use as seen in the current case and thus requiring a comment to be understand for such special exception criteria in the rural residential district. Justice Connery had asked my colleague if there was any other request for setbacks. There was, just to clear the reverend there was a request for setback 100 feet from the sidewalk from the side boundary as it relates to the rural residential district so there was a request for that at the zone. Do you agree that that the petitions here preserved their argument that

**Justice**: a variance was not necessary?

**Counsel**: Yes, I agree with the Barclay decision that it's a jurisdictional matter, a subject matter jurisdiction, and it's never going to be waived and it's always present no matter what the venue is. But they had ruled that they did not make that argument to the ZVA, that's my question. I do still think it's a valid argument even if it wasn't made at the ZVA level. However, my argument is that based upon Barclay itself if you look at the nature of your understanding you have to look at the application of the regulation to propose use. So whether you know it or not you're conducting the same legal exercise and I think the Housing and Skills Board did that, again I'd say likely in the morning we might agree but that's really what the exercise was in turn whether or not this regulation applied to this particular use of the nexuses. So just by doing that analysis you have I think achieved addressing the jurisdiction line. So as I said, even with the accomplished property I was unable to meet the differential requirements in the agricultural district that's not allowed such use by special exception. The only request was to pursue the neccessary variances in this matter. So there was a need to pursue these variances both in the rural residential district as well as the agricultural rural district. The next matter that needs to be addressed is whether or not this property met the criteria for variances and in both the Clean Walk ZBA as well as the Housing and Skills Board the issue was we wrestled upon the NSU hardship scene and I think in both situations the ZBA as well as the HAB determined that there really were no special conditions to pursue this property. The argument really is that the property is oddly shaped. Well, if you look at the other properties in that district why on earth are they

**Justice**: oddly shaped? I mean that really isn't

**Counsel**: a special condition giving rise to the need for the NSU hardship. So the Housing and Skills Board I think is correct in finding that as was the time on its own. I'm not understanding why isn't the petitioner's argument that the combination of size and frontage relative to other lots why doesn't that constitute

**Justice**: an unnecessary hardship?

**Counsel**: Well, because the matter is really an April protection issue does this regulation burden all the properties in the district or is this regulation really burdening some of them and really the issue is that all these properties are properly burdened by this regulation so it's equal amongst the district. But it has an unequal effect here because the frontage is 400 feet and it requires a thousand. Well, it's an unequal effect in the sense that that's the proposed use. They're seeking a certain use which is indicated of the relationship between the frontage requirement and the use as a short-term rental. I mean, what difference does it make

**Justice**: in a practical manner?

**Counsel**: Well, I think the reality is and I'm sure the Board is probably fully aware of how every of these were, you know, someone who was in bias application property they probably even marketed as, you know, only eight people can go there and the next thing you know is a weekend there where everyone in the family has shown up for a weekend and they can be on the job for the situation. So really having increased traffic and increased population on the property it really is a different aspect than just having a vacation property where, you know, a few people go there on a weekend to use it. It truly becomes... Because of the possibility of the increase of use because what I mean by the front-party is that having a certain people using the property you may have 18 people using the property. So the idea is there's going to be more products coming to the site there's going to be more of a use of the property there's going to be more of a presence of the property which is really what you know, both Clayton-Mott and other communities are worried about they're really truly worried about introducing such a large number of people and taxing both, you know, the travel ways as well as septic and water rules and different things so that's the reason what we come to regulate this use. So, again, going on to a special back-to-dundance again, how did those people

**Justice**: determine that?

**Counsel**: There really wasn't a special condition just because of the shape of the lot and then, so in the professional ways, well, is there any nexus between the

**Justice**: purpose of the regulation and the proposed use?

**Counsel**: Well, again, I think that that really gets resolved when you deal with Gerald Fitchland, because we talked about the market, which is to say if this regulation does impact or control this type of use then you answer the question as to whether or not there's any substantial relationship in the answer to that really has to be yes because that was the entire purpose behind the regulations that the city was seeking to address this particular type of use in its special exception regulations as it relates to this district. So the notion that there is no clear or substantial reason or purpose behind the application of this regulation that is used, again cannot be in any way questionable if you determine that this truly was a regulation determined for this particular use. How does the HAB maintain jurisdiction if it doesn't make a decision within 60 days

**Justice**: is required by the statute?

**Counsel**: Well, I think that my argument would be is that if they don't maintain jurisdiction

**Justice**: what would be the remedy for the work?

**Counsel**: Well, I'm asking you the statute clearly says the board shall make a decision on an appeal within 60 days after conducting a hearing on the merits. This decision was nearly one year. I don't see how we can condone that. What's your argument that they still had jurisdiction

**Justice**: after the 60 day period expired?

**Counsel**: Well, I would argue that well, certainly there's a requirement in the statute the problem is that it comes in due process issue where one party may get prejudice over another just because of the delay. I think it could be entirely prejudicial for the city to incur some sort of adverse decision from Housing and Computers Board or even this court just because of the delay from the lower ministry of agency to this case. I would argue that there really is no remedy in terms of addressing this matter as to the outcome of this case because in doing so you are unduly, in my position, unduly prejudicing of active party to the case so that they have no role in the delay of the decision. And equally prejudicing the person who wants to use their property

**Justice**: in a certain way?

**Counsel**: Well, absolutely. I'm not dismissing that. The problem comes with the solution and I don't have a good solution before I will address that with the Housing and Computers Board I just don't see that it's an equitable solution to determine that because you did not make a decision and therefore the appealing party wins by that effect. So I guess in summary I would just ask that for all the reasons that are cited in my argument and the brief of the this will confirm the decision of the no one's only board with adjustment as well as the Housing and Computers Board. Thank you. Thank you very much, council. I would like to address this fraught party. If we assume that this is another transient use that's commercial use of the property that the fire is and the setback variance that was mentioned was one that is only required that's another transient use. There are a lot of special conditions on this property besides the lack of frontiers. The fact that it's undeveloped and heavily wooded that provides a buffer from the neighbors that prevents sights, sounds, noise, lights from coming into the other areas. The fact that the other areas around them are also fairly undeveloped. The increased trafficked noise of the fraught parties on this property aren't an issue because of all the special conditions and particular use. This went on for 18 months before anybody realized there was a violation of the zoning ordinance for no complaints. The ZBA said this is a reasonable use. We wish it stayed under the radar so that we didn't have to deny this. The ZBA has to look at the particular use in front of not some hypothetical other use. You have photos of what this property would look like, what the camera looks like. You can't fit a fraternity. That's less than 100 square feet or less than 150 square feet. It's a small thing. Now, the Verbes, the ZBA said could bring their fraternity. They could bring everybody up there and have a big party there without the Verbes. So that concern is not related to the Verbes. That's just a fact of having a piece of property next door. If the ZBA were concerned about that, they could put conditions on this. Fine, you can have the Verbes, but it's conditioned on there only being two people in the camera at a time. You can only have two people in the cabin. You can't have anybody else coming to visit. All of those are optional. It's not what they did. They said we have to treat this as if it were just any other hotel or hotel. That's just not the right legal standard. That's why zoning variants don't have a presidential effect. Because it is this particular use on this particular property and that's it. By saying we have to pretend this is a hotel that applied the wrong legal standard. That's what we have to deal with. That's what we have to look at. If this is even requiring variants, which as I've discussed before, this is essentially renting out their vacation. Anybody who says, sure, you can use my vacation home for a week. If you can't be here, that's not a zoning option. Thank you very much, council. He's submitted. Please rise.
