# In the Matter of James Mann

- Docket: 2025-0034
- Argument date: 2026-02-10
- Vimeo: https://vimeo.com/1163670112
- Transcript status: machine-generated draft

## Transcript

**Justice**: This is case 2025-0034 in the matter of James Mann. Good morning, Attorney Sanderford. I understand you reserved two minutes for a rebuttal. Yes, Your Honor. Please proceed. Thank you, Your Honor, and just thank you to the court for allowing us to be heard. Again, if it pleased the court, I'll begin. Just identify yourself. Sure, I apologize, Your Honor. Again, my name is Colin Sanderford. I represent the petitioner, Mr. Mann, in this matter. The question before the court today involves the interpretation of New Hampshire RSA 651-B6 Roman numeral VA, talking about the duration of registration, specifically the passage that we're talking about here is the one that states that any Tier II or Tier III offender who was convicted prior to the establishment of the sex offender registry may petition the court to be relieved from the registration requirements under this chapter. And that court they're referring to is the Superior Court in the town where they're residing for someone who's out of state. And what we're talking about here, Mr. Mann, is someone who was convicted in Massachusetts prior to the establishment of the registry in that state. Right, he was convicted at the time that New Hampshire had the registry. That's correct, Your Honor. So aren't you asking us to add language to the statute? Well, we're asking you to, I guess, interpret the statute in such a way, obviously, that allows Mr. Mann to seek relief. We believe that the way that the state, given the way that the statute was, well, the way the statute's written, coupled with the way in which it came into existence as a result of this court's finding in Dovey State back in 2015, in that case the court went through a rather extensive analysis of the sex offender registry scheme here in New Hampshire to ascertain whether or not it had a punitive effect on the petitioner who was someone who was convicted in this state prior to the registry. And at the end of that, the court found that the sex offender registry system did have punitive effects, at least as they were applied to the petitioner in that case. It laid out a remedy for the resultant ex-post-facto violation, and it essentially found that the only way for the act to be constitutionally enforced against that petitioner, someone who was convicted prior to the establishment of the registry in this state, was for that person to be given the opportunity for a hearing to determine if they needed to continue registering. The court laid out the process in Doe that court should follow until the legislature essentially enacted that statute, and the legislature did go in and act 651B6 from an annual VA, 5A. Doe was an as-applied challenge, right? That's correct, Your Honor. And your client has not made an as-applied challenge here? I don't, no, Your Honor, not specifically to him as far as that's concerned, but our position is essentially that when the court left it to the legislature to fashion the particulars of what this hearing process would look like, of what this remedy would look like for folks and for petitioners in Doe's position at that time, I had also did so with the caveat that this process would meet the standards of fundamental fairness. And part of that. If we create a system, let's suppose there's a state with no sex offender registry whatsoever. We would create a system where non-New Hampshire residents convicted out of state would have greater opportunity for relief than New Hampshire residents convicted in state. Why should we do that from a policy perspective? So from a policy perspective, first of all, I don't know that there are any states, territories or other entities that don't have some form of registry in place as far as that's concerned, at least within our, again, like I said, within our national system here, within the United States and our territories. Second of all, there certainly may be ways for, again, for the state to go in and, you know, the state can certainly look to certain convictions. I believe that's what the state does now to essentially find out if those are analogous to whatever laws we have here and it makes that determination. Again, like I said, I don't know if the example is necessarily one that we would, from a policy perspective, that we'd have to worry about because I don't know that you're going to find any governmental entities that don't have a registry system in place as far as that's concerned. As to the language of the statute, Section 1B6, Roman 5A refers to the establishment of the sex offender registry. Isn't the use of the, I mean, the New Hampshire sex offender registry? It could be read that way, certainly, Your Honor. And, but it's- Wouldn't the legislature have used A instead of B? It could have, Your Honor. You know, the fact that it didn't, I guess may indicate some sort of intent as far as that's concerned, but I would note that the legislature had the benefit of having the DOE case and the court's reasoning and the court's analysis and the court's language where it pointed out that the issue with the registry system was the lifetime review without registration, they specifically said. Absent this lifetime review without registration, we think it's okay. But this lifetime review without registration provision was where the court said it becomes punitive and it becomes so punitive that it becomes unconstitutional. And the court didn't say that, again, and for what it's worth, the court didn't necessarily say that lifetime review without registration is necessarily a bad thing or is necessarily unconstitutional. Indeed, people convicted today are subject to lifetime review without the ability to be removed from that list. The difference between people convicted today or defendants convicted after the establishment of the registry in their own state is that those people are all noticed at the time of their conviction that one of the main collateral consequences of that conviction. I wanna get back to the statute because it's the immediate issue before us. Another section of the same chapter, B11, Roman I, uses the same phrase, the sex offender registry. Are you familiar with that? I don't necessarily have that one committed to memory. What I would say is that... But that phrase in the context of that paragraph of chapter 651B, it clearly refers to these sex offender registry in New Hampshire because it's talking about defraying the cost of the registry here in New Hampshire. Certainly are. You agree with that? I do, I would agree with that. It's certainly to the extent that that's how the court's reading it again. I just, I can't, like I said, I don't have it committed to memory. What I would offer though, when we're talking about the provision that we're getting into, what we're talking about is removal from the registry. And as we noted, in Doe, the court said that is the, that's the main issue. That's the reason that the court said something's gotta be done about this registry. That's why the legislature has to go back and enact legislation to essentially save the act. Otherwise, we know, you know, the court said we know you don't want us to just completely vitiate it and we're not going to go back and tell you which parts of the act are too punitive. So instead we're gonna... The client has the ability to petition for removal. He does, he doesn't, Your Honor. He can petition for removal from the public list. Correct. But that's not removal from the registration requirement. And that's, it's the ability to be relieved from the registration requirement that was at issue in Doe. And the plaintiff in Doe is the issue in Doe, again, is that the plaintiff there was not aware, again, had not been given notice. That's what, when the court talks about the remedy that it was fashioning, the common denominators in sort of what it discusses there is the idea of notice and a process for a remedy. And it talks about that in other contexts. It talks about DCYF case and property tax issues there. You haven't raised a constitutional claim in this appeal. You're referring to Doe, but you, I mean, where's the argument that that there's a violation of the constitution? Well, again, I guess it's just the, my lack of artful drafting there as far as that's concerned, Your Honor. And perhaps I'm taking too much of a simplistic look at this. Again, our position is that someone, the legislature went out and crafted the statute as it did and it talked about the establishment of the sex offender registry. The legislature knows, as we see in other parts of the statute there, that there will be others coming, that there will likely be other people coming from other states because it refers to the fact that people who are convicted in other states will have to register. So when we think about the idea that then there's going to be this enactment that says people who were convicted prior to the establishment of the registry have the ability to seek relief from the registration requirements, it would follow then that the registry that would be controlling in that situation would be the home state registry. Again, in a situation such as this, Mr. Mann was not on notice at the time of his conviction that there would be any collateral consequences. There would be any registration, whether in Massachusetts or anywhere else as far as that's concerned. So given that, then it seems clear that what the court was wanting there is again, someone should at least be on notice that they would have to register for life. And if they weren't on notice of that whenever they were convicted, they should at least be allowed the opportunity to be heard and to be removed from the registry. Doesn't say that they have to be removed from the registry. They at least need an opportunity to be heard whether the court can at least make a determination as to whether or not they're a danger. In this situation, the court could have certainly heard Mr. Mann's case and just denied him the relief in question. So we're not saying that he's entitled to the relief just the hearing as far as that's concerned. I do want to point out the state has some concern. The state did note some concerns in its response that somehow this would lead to, again, additional people coming from other states that would seek relief under our reading of the statute. And while that might be the case, that's a finite number of people that's not going to get any larger. There won't be any other people that are convicted prior to the establishment of any registries. I don't think they're, like I said, I don't think there are any states where there are no registries. So that's a number of people that's only going to get smaller as the years go by. It's not going to, that won't be increased. And the other piece is that, again, in practice, to the extent that this is read to essentially read that the registry in question would be the registry for the state of conviction, it essentially just be one extra line in a petition to seek removal from the registry, whereby someone would just point out that they are eligible for relief because they were convicted in a certain state and that state established a registry in a certain year and they were convicted prior to that. So it's not going to lead to anything that's going to be challenging for course to be able to ascertain and it's not going to lead to any sort of influx in my mind that we would see as far as additional people coming from other states that were convicted prior to, in the mid 1990s and before, come out here somehow coming to seek relief and like I said, that number of people is not going to get any larger. So from a policy perspective, the state's concerns are minimal compared to when we compare those to Mr. Mann's rights and to what he's facing and his inability to seek any kind of relief even though he was convicted prior to the establishment of the registry in Massachusetts for what it's worth, he has been removed from that requirement in Massachusetts. And now he just seeks the opportunity to seek that same relief here in New Hampshire. Thank you. Thank you. Reserved minutes. Attorney Carroll.

**Counsel**: May it please the court? Attorney Carroll, Collin Carroll for the Department of Safety through the Department of Justice. This appeal today is a simple matter of statutory interpretation, namely RSA 651B room in numeral five section A. The trial court below found that the term of the use of the sex offender registry had the singular indefinite article that preceded it, which led to the clear and unambiguous reading that the term the sex offender registry under that statute is referring to the New Hampshire sex offender registry. As this court had just pointed out, the term the sex offender registry is used also in RSA 651B11, Roman numeral run. And I would also point out that under that statute, the one that issues 651B6 Roman numeral five, just in the subsequent sentences in that paragraph, the legislature is distinguishing the sex offender from New Hampshire to the sex offender registries in those foreign jurisdictions. And so taking that context, not just the plain language of the statute, but also the context of the paragraph at whole, it's clear that the legislature intended that to be, and the language is clear that it should refer to the New Hampshire sex offender registry. The appellant is essentially asking this court to read words into the statute. And what he's asking this court to do is subordinate New Hampshire's registration relief requirements to those requirements of those foreign jurisdictions based on their action as to when they, those registries were established. In this instance, the petitioner, the New Hampshire sex offender registry was established in 1992. The petitioner was convicted in 1995. And so there is no dispute that he does not qualify as a tier one or tier two offender who was convicted prior to the establishment of the sex offender registry. To the extent the petitioner is arguing that because of his similar situation to the petitioner and dough, he's entitled to the statutory relief. This is a statutory petition that is asking for statutory relief from the statutory scheme. As this court had pointed out, the petitioner and dough was bringing forth an as applied constitutional challenge. And that analysis that was present in that case is simply not here. In any case, this court need not read words of the statute when the petitioner can simply bring forth another declaratory judgment action and bring forth those arguments similar to one in dough. It would be inappropriate for this court to do the intense effects analysis done in dough when it simply has not been briefed for the lower court. It hasn't been brought on the notice of appeal and to the extent that it's raised at all whatsoever in the appellant's brief. It hasn't been adequately briefed the states would be prejudiced to provide an analysis in that regard. The lower court was correct in finding that to the extent that there's any relevance of the similar situation of dough, which as I alluded to earlier, the sole qualifier for relief under the statute is being convicted prior to the establishment of the New Hampshire sex offender registry. To the extent there is any similar situation with dough it's not relevant to the statutory relief here. And the lower court correctly found and there's no dispute here that the petitioner here has a different set of facts, different relief available to him. Whereas in dough there was no relief for removal from the public list. The petitioner here can petition to have that removal from the public list.

**Justice**: But what about his argument?

**Counsel**: He's still required to register for life. He may still be required to register for life but to the extent that he's now coming and making the argument that is unconstitutional as applied to me, he simply just has not briefed the issue and nothing would foreclose him from allowing him to make those arguments and bring forth the declaratory judgment. So here it's just a matter of the petitioner is in a different situation as the petitioner in dough, there's no dispute there. There is different relief available to him and the state's simply asking this court not to reword into the statute where the language is clear and unambiguous. It's referring to the sex offender registry and I think there's unique public safety concerns in the state of New Hampshire when you look at the state of Massachusetts we're a very different state. We have very different legislature and so we have unique public safety concerns. We restrict the request not to allow offenders to come into New Hampshire and say I'm gonna carry those laws from that foreign jurisdiction with us when it simply was not contemplated in the statute. It's not contemplated under the statutory relief requirements. What's your response to the argument in Mr. Mann's brief that the tier three of just reading the tier three offenders such as the one in dough has a chance to seek greater relief

**Justice**: than Mr. Mann, a tier two offender in a similar position?

**Counsel**: And I take that to mean that a tier three offender under the statutory scheme has the ability to be or has the right to seek removal from the registration or excuse from the registration requirement whereas a tier two offender would not.

**Justice**: Thank you.

**Counsel**: To the extent there's any difference here it's simply based on that factual distinction which is the petitioner in dough was convicted in 1987. The New Hampshire sex offender industry was established in 1992 whereas the petitioner here was convicted or pled in 1995. And so in dough you're dealing with an ex post-facso constitutional analysis where this registration relief is required to uphold the constitutionality of the statute whereas in here that those same circumstances are not present. In this instance, prior to Mr. Mann's conviction the New Hampshire sex offender registry was published in public law and so therefore that same remedy is not necessitated here under the statute. Of course there's no further questions so I would rest on my briefs.

**Justice**: Thank you.

**Counsel**: Thank you very much. Thank you Carol. To the bottom. Again as noted the fact that Mr. Mann has somehow can seek the middling relief to be removed from the public list should not preclude him from seeking the removal from the list as far as that's concerned. Bottom line is this court has found that subjecting someone to lifetime registration without the ability to be reviewed when that person was convicted prior to the establishment of the sex offender registry when that person was not on notice that they would be required to register is a problem.

**Justice**: Well how is he not on notice of New Hampshire's registry?

**Counsel**: He was a Massachusetts resident. Nothing would stop him from knowing if he had a goal of living in New Hampshire one day or he had property in New Hampshire. Nothing would deprive him of the opportunity to know New Hampshire's law if that was important to him. I think it would be unreasonable to expect a defendant in one state to go and ascertain the collateral consequences that they may face in 50 other states and any number of territories or other jurisdictions as far as that's concerned. And then know that and somehow and then make those decisions. I think that that would be unworkable. Again, the bottom line is Mr. Mann was convicted prior to the establishment of the registry in Massachusetts. The court made it very clear that that was really the problem there. That's what they laid out to the legislature. This is the problem. Work on this idea of registration or of registration without any type of review. Mr. Mann was convicted, again, he was convicted prior to the establishment of the registry was not required to register until actually his sentence was completed in 2002. So again, while his facts may be somewhat different from the plaintiff in Doe, the bottom line is he was required to register without ever having been put on notice of that. And the way that the statute, we should read the statute in such a way that it winds up being constitutional under the mandates of Doe. At a minimum, isn't he presumed to know the requirements of New Hampshire law

**Justice**: when he moves to the state?

**Counsel**: Certainly, yes, certainly there is that, Your Honor. But again, that was not until many years later after the conviction. So again, that is certainly a part of it to the extent that he chooses to move here. He may have to register and he may have to go through this process. But at the time of his conviction, he wouldn't have known that. And like I said, he would have had to have gone out and known 49 other states and also a number of territories. And that would just be, again, unreasonable to think that someone's wanted to get into that when they're in the middle of plea negotiations or trial as far as that's concerned. Thank you very much, Attorney Sanderford. Thank you, Council. The case is submitted. Court invites a council in
