# Hologic, Inc. & a. v. Commissioner, New Hampshire Department of Revenue Administration & a.

- Docket: 2025-0240
- Argument date: 2026-05-12
- Vimeo: https://vimeo.com/1191667448
- Transcript status: machine-generated draft

## Transcript

**Justice**: This is case 2025-0240, Hologic Inc. et al. versus Commission or New Hampshire Department of Revenue Administration et al. Good morning. Excuse me. For the record, Justice Gould is not able to be with us physically today. He will be reviewing the tape of today's argument and will be participating in our deliberations and decision. So without Attorney Galdieri, I understand you reserved one minute for a bottle. Mr. Ryan, thank you. May I please look forward? My name is Anthony Galdieri and I represent the Commissioner of the Department of Revenue in the Department of Revenue in this map. This case concerns how a capital loss carryback is treated under the business profits tax. The statutorily defined term, combined net income, answers that question. That term means what it says. Multiple net incomes combined were brought together. It functionally requires the business organizations conducting a unitary business to determine their own revenue less expenses as determined under the internal revenue code and then combined them. This revenue less expense calculation treats capital losses as offsets from capital gains, prohibits capital losses from creating a net operating loss for the business organization, and permits capital losses to be carried back into proceeding tax years so long as they do not create a net operating loss for that business organization in that year. The business profits tax is therefore clear and unambiguous in its treatment of capital loss carrybacks. The superior court erred in concluding otherwise. It began its analysis in the wrong place with RSA 77A6 Roman IV, a reporting statute that tells a water's edge combined group to file a return containing its combined net income with the commission. So I know you characterized that provision as a reporting statute, but there's still language in there that has to be grappled with whether it's properly in that section or not, right? And so how do you account for that particular sentence that the commissioner is authorized to impose the taxes of the enterprise was one business organization? Well, a few answers to that. The first answer is between the first section, the first sentence, excuse me, of that paragraph, the report still has to contain combined net income. Combined net income is a specifically defined term in the statute that has to be calculated in a particular way. Once the returns are filed and one of the items that's reported is combined net income, then the commissioner is authorized or permitted to impose the tax as if the entire combined net income is not a one business organization. But that doesn't change how it's calculated. The statutory definition governs how it's calculated. And it's very specific that combined net income is the revenues less expenses as determined under the internal revenue code for all the business organizations conducting a unitary business. Do you know when that language was added to the statute, to paragraph four? Paragraph four, and I believe it was added in 1986. But in the language on which the trial court relied and the logic is pointing, that was part of the original statute? It was part of the law that put the Waters Edge method into place, as I understand it. The laws of 1986, chapter 153, which amended the Waters Edge framework into the business profits tax. It contains the definition of Waters Edge method of combined net income, but it also includes this new paragraph four that is the reporting environment for the Waters Edge group members. So your argument, as I understand it, you can read it harmoniously because of paragraph four's reference to combined net income. Yes, because the combined net income, you're told how to calculate that before you report that. And then once you report combined net income, then you do, they run a portion, they get the enforcement factors, they adjust the combined net income by revisions and deductions. And they put it all together to get your taxable business profits. So when the commissioner goes to impose the tax, she's getting the information that she needs to impose the tax. She's not required to impose it, as if the entire net income is that of one business organization. She's authorized to adjust the tax for the income as well, if necessary, to reflect a more accurate taxation, how that sentence is phrased. But ultimately, the Superior Court here didn't grapple with the definition of combined net income. It didn't figure out how the Waters Edge method applies and works in practice. And the way it works in practice, like for all the business organizations where a subject of business profits tax is it requires those business organizations individually to calculate their net income. And that's where the capital losses are taken within those individual calculations. And then to combine them to get combined net income. So what does the reference to one business organization in paragraph four mean? What are those words mean? So I think what that means is because combined net income is a series of individual incomes, when you get them all together in this combined return, then the commissioner, because of how they're calculated, is authorized to impose the tax as if that combined net income is the income of one business organization. Because of how it's built. But it doesn't tell you how to build that number. It doesn't tell you how to calculate that number. And the Superior Court's decision below is a little bit remarkable in the sense of finding the statute to be silent on capital carry back losses. Because first, it's not. But second, if the statute were truly silent on the issue of capital carry back losses, the takeaway from that would be that they are not permitted. Not that the Superior Court can fashion its own tax policy out of what it perceives to be the purpose of the statute and allow these capital losses to be offset the capital gains of other members of the group. If there was a surplus of capital gain, would that be taxed at the same rate as the business income? So the capital gain would be revenue to that business. So as it calculates, as the individual business organization. Yes. Yes, it will be revenue to the individual business organization in the calculation of their net income. I may be wrong about this, but an individual who has capital gain and is paying a federal income tax, might that be a different rate than their income tax rate? It might be, I'm not sure. So in this context, a capital gain would get reported where for the purposes of the business profit tax? So the capital gain gets reported within, there's going to be forms where you're going to do the reporting? Is it similar, so you used as the example a federal tax return where there's the calculation of income and then capital gain is a separate line on a separate form and it gets pulled back into the main return. Is it similar for the business profit tax? Or is it calculated as part of the income? I think it's all calculated together and then reported in the combined return, but it is functionally done in the same way where you delve into the internal revenue code to figure out the rules for capital losses as they apply to capital gains under the revenues portion in determining the revenues less the expenses. There may be separate, I don't know though for sure, if there are separate forms for each business organization that are submitted to the commissioner as well as the combined return. So your statement earlier that RSA 77A is not silent as the last carrybacks. Is that premised on the reference to the internal revenue code? It incorporates essentially the entire internal revenue code into the calculation of revenues less expenses. And it even does that under the term gross business profits, which is essentially is being equated in 77A, 1, Roman 3 to the net income or net profits of various different types of businesses. There will be references in 77A, 1, Roman 3, sub-nerograph F, which references Water's Edge Group specifically and says that the gross business profits are essentially their net income as determined under the internal revenue code. That's for Water's Edge Group members who don't file a federal tax return or another schedule within that section. So in our view, this statute is not silent. The statute is clear. And the constitutional arguments I think made by the appellees now, they have as I understand constitutional claims below that have not been addressed by the superior court or more resolved. But they seem to raise arguments on appeal that this court should interpret 77A, 6, 4. In the way they suggest, in the way the superior court did, because that may create a constitutional problem, or at least a federal constitutional problem they argue, because of how this interpretation may impact apportionment. I don't think the stipulated record in this case establishes how the DRA conducts apportionment at a granular enough level for that argument to be persuasive. But I also understand those various cases to state that the Constitution imposes no singular formula on the states for apportionment, that there may be variations in how states do these things, exactitude is not required, and ultimately the taxpayer has the burden. Can we reach those issues in the first instance, or do we need to remand it back to the trial court? I think those claims, you need to remand it back to the trial court for the trial court to resolve those claims. Tribunal has resolved those claims. The DRA did not, the superior court did not, this court's function is generally not to resolve claims that haven't been addressed by the superior court. The better court sentence suggests would be to remand to address those claims. But the appallee's argument in the superior court's decision also I think raised a potential state constitutional question, because they create a setup where certain types of business organizations solely because they are part of the unitary business may have their taxable business profits ultimately calculated in a materially different way than single filing business organizations or business organizations that are closely related but they only do business activity in the state, like family-owned restaurant chain or something like that. They will have to conduct their net income separately and will not be able to take capital losses off the capital gains of another closely related business. The appallee's are urging the court to adopt a scenario where if you conduct business activity within and without the state and therefore unitary business, you get that specialized treatment and try to drill down to what the taxable class of property is, which is taxable business profits of the group. I think that raises a significant constitutional doubt that the statute I think takes great pains to try to avoid and tries to ensure that individual net income calculations are done so that when they are combined, they are adjusted by additions and deductions properly and impartially. This court in the Baxter International case recognized RSA 7786, it has a reporting statute and while that was looking at the statute as it existed pre-1986, the amendment in 1986 changes nothing. If you look at the chapter law, that creates the water's edge framework and still just inserting what is essentially a reporting requirement and an authorization for the commissioner to impose the tax. Nothing has changed about the function of that statute. Reading into that statute, some pure unitary theory that exists outside the statute is I think a recipe to invite lower courts to start making tax policy on a case-by-case basis as they grapple with how does this statute treat this expense or this loss or this deduction or this rule or this theory. Just as the Superior Court did here where it had hit a roadblock, it sort of couldn't get itself passed. The DRA doesn't contend that the statute is ambiguous, does it? No, the DRA contends it is ambiguous. So the references to agency deference and administrative gloss are really not of any consequence? They're really not of any consequence. We would suggest if you believe they are ambiguous that there is deference owed. And the DRA has been doing it this way since the inception, as I understand it, since the inception of the business profits tax, and only now has this issue come up to the Supreme Court. So the rules were adopted, the rules were adopted, went through the jail car process with paragraph 4 in place, correct? So there was the legislator, that process at least deemed that the rule was consistent with the statute. You mean the administrative rules? Yes, I believe that the administrative rules was in place. For all those reasons, we would ask that you reverse. Thank you. Thank you, Tony. Tony Gaudieri? Tony Lewis?

**Counsel**: Good morning, Your Honours, and may it please the Court. Michael Lewis from Matthew, I hope you can tell on behalf of Hologic and affiliated companies. The case that's up in this address is Justice Doddabin's question about remand to a certain extent. This case sets up almost entirely as a legal issue by virtue of the many agreements the parties have already reached to focus the courts on the issue here. The record is stipulated below. The parties agreed to focus below on the pertinent issues. And the pertinent issues were focused on the calculation of the tax base for a combined reporter under New Hampshire. Not nexus, not apportionment, not the application of rates, not the application of credits, but the above the line position that a combined reporting tax payer returns to DRA when filing a return. And so that's where this case begins and ends. And the position that we take with respect to the legality of it is focused on three provisions. RSA 77A1 Roman 1, RSA 77A6 Roman 4, and RSA 77A1 Roman 13. That order, because what these provisions do in terms of organizing the legal analysis is they first draw a distinction, which is a fundamental distinction which we believe the DRA's interpretive position violates between a separate and a group order and a combined order. So under 77A1 Roman 1, what the statute's plain terms state is that you file returns as if you are a separate entity except with respect to combined reporting. And that drives you not to 77A2 where the state argues you should be, but to 77A64. And there is where Judge Kissinger correctly concluded the state hits its statutory roadblock because there the statute is unmistakably clear and its purpose is also unmistakably stated. Which is that when you're calculating the tax base of a combined reporter, you treat the combined reporter as if it was one business organization. And how you treat the combined reporter as one business organization is you ask how would a separate filer with multiple divisions interstate the treating capital loss carrybacks under these circumstances. And the answer to that question is precisely how Hologic did. That is, and no one disputes, there's no dispute whatsoever that the IRC provisions here permit the capital loss offsets. That is to say as a concept, there's no dispute. The dispute is just about the extent and how the mechanics of the offset are applied.

**Justice**: So are you saying that the IRS code permits what happened here that in these types of businesses, one entity's carrybacks can be offset to gains in another entity's?

**Counsel**: Not only am I saying that, but I'm saying no one disagrees except with regard to the extent to which the offset is permitted. No one agrees, and there's never been any dispute about this, that the member that experienced the loss in this case is permitted to some extent to apply the loss against the earlier gain under the code. There's no dispute about that. It's on for that individual small entity. For the member that, yeah, so the dispute, which we tried to diagram in our brief, is about whether it can be trapped and siloed with the, whether the loss can be trapped and siloed with the entity that experienced the loss or whether it applies throughout the entire member. And our position is that the statutes of the issue, particularly RSA 7076-4, this is what Judge Kissinger concluded also, requires the offset completely to occur throughout the entire member group because that's how you treat a combined reporter as one business organization. So, and this touches on the constitutional issues. So the state constitutional issues. So Part 1 Article 12, 5 and 6 all require under your cases from the opinion of justices from 1990, 1989 and 1986 require a series of principles to be applied under these circumstances. Equal treatment of business income under the BPD and equal treatment of taxpayers. And each are implicated here by virtue of the RSA's position. So, and the apples to apples comparison is between the combined, interstate combined reporter, which is halogic, and the single entity interstate reporter, which is a hypothetical, similar situated company. So imagine for instance that you had a single entity, a single reporter that is operating multiple divisions in multiple states. That reporter would be permitted to do what halogic is doing across its entire organization, but DRA's position is that halogic is not permitted to do that as a combined reporter. And that position not only conflicts with RSA 77864, it conflicts with what you've said about equal treatment of taxpayers and business income under the state constitution.

**Justice**: What's the difference between a combined report and a consolidated return? How do those differ?

**Counsel**: That's a very important question because it's been raised by the DRA repeatedly. And it was addressed by Professor Pomp in his testimony below. So we retained an expert who is a recognized expert in state taxation, who's the only witness to testify below and explain the distinction. So it's in the record. And the distinction is that effectively that a consolidated reporter makes the election under federal law. But a combined reporter under state law is required to report as a combined reporter and is only able to do so by virtue of what is not in dispute here. Which is that the combined reporter is operating as a unitary business. And unitary business is a separate state tax concept. It's a tax concept that essentially requires related businesses who have related ownership structures, affiliated purposes, to be treated as if substance trumps form. So that all of the value flowing between the business is recognized as if the combined reporter is a single business, so that the income reporting isn't distorted.

**Justice**: Is it your position that the internal revenue code allows a combined reporter to offset its gains against different entities' losses?

**Counsel**: Yes. Not a consolidated but a combined reporter. Yes. So a combined reporter is not a federal tax concept.

**Justice**: Right.

**Counsel**: So maybe I'm being too oblique. I'm thinking here of RSA 77A colon one Roman 3F, which sort of directs the process through the internal revenue code. And I'm trying to square that up with the state's assertion that the internal revenue code wouldn't permit this sort of a cross entity charging, I'll call it. The internal revenue code would permit it. I'm not aware that this is in dispute. And you could be a combined reporter and a consolidated filer. Yes. One and the same. In other words, you could be both of those things at once. Yes, but that doesn't mean that there have been a diagram of a lapse.

**Justice**: Right.

**Counsel**: And that means that really effectively it means that a combined reporter is a subset of the, it could be a subset, could be a subset of the consolidated report. Yes. But it's effectively a different concept. It's a concept defined by state law. Versus federal law.

**Justice**: Right.

**Counsel**: But also with an undergirding of federal constitutional law and state constitutional law. All of this is set within a framework where states have had to figure out how to deal with the complexities of multi-jurisdictional businesses with regard to taxation. And if you read the federal constitutional law, the by theory that you see repeatedly both in the Sarko decision and the Mobile Oil decision is the unitary business principle as being the lynchpin of what is permitted as a matter of the limitations into process. And so, and that, you know, conceptual framework makes its way into, among other provisions, RSA77A113. And there, the provisions are explicit. And that's, this is what makes Professor Pomp's testimony so important. The provisions not, you know, not only provide for a definition of combined net income that includes revenues less expenses, but they explicitly refer to concepts of RSA77A for all business organizations conducting unitary business. So what occurs in the statute is an incorporation of unitary business theory by the statute in order to save the statute from trenching against federal constitutional law. And in order also to ensure that the statute is complying with the equality principles that are contained in the state constitution. And the explicit recognition of concept allows, I think, this court to consider what Professor Pomp has said about the ways in which the DRA's position will violate the concepts that are fundamental to the unitary business and unitary business, business profit, tax, principles. And what he has said is that, and this is also drawn from your GE decision and also from the state's briefing in GE, is that the purpose of the unitary business principle and how it functions is to ensure value flows among and between members of a combined reporter so that there isn't a distorted reporting regarding business profits tax. So how do you respond to the DRA's argument that under current law, each business under RSA A colon 5, there's a limit to the carry over losses that can be allocated. And under the Superior Court's theory, your business, the unitary business would be subject to that limitation for the entire group. There'd be a $10 million limit, not imposed on each member, but on the entire group.

**Justice**: Is that a consequence that we should be concerned about?

**Counsel**: It isn't a consequence you should be concerned about. It's never been briefed. No party has ever raised it as a consequence above and below. It's not even, I don't believe, raised as a basis for any claims regarding concerns about our interpretation and even rise to unequal treatment. I would also say in response to the state's position regarding consequences, the state's position regarding the unequal treatment of in-state combined reporters and in-state single-ended reporters, if it were taken to its logical conclusion, would effectively eradicate almost the entire VPT as it relates to how it functions against combined reporters. That is to say combined reporters that are interstate combined reporters under unlike single-ended reporters, they have to engage in all sorts of separate ways of calculating their ultimate tax liability. They have separate procedures for dealing with intra-member transactions in terms of value. They have separate ways of dealing with ordinary income and loss. They have separate ways of dealing with credits. And so if you were to credit the, frankly, if you were to credit the state's position here on saving this as against their claims regarding constitutional concern, it would open an even larger can of worms for the state than predating our position because it would really undermine the unitary principle as it relates to the infrastructure of the VPT in this area.

**Justice**: Does 77A4 contemplate capital gains or losses?

**Counsel**: It's the section on additions and deductions. No, because capital gains and losses are, I believe, what we would call line 28 calculations. So they're above the line, and then all of that occurs below the line. And so it's effectively in calculating tax base with what you're doing is you're engaging in an analysis of revenue but taking into consideration also things like capital gains and capital losses and offsets. So it's above the line deduction. I believe my time is up. Anyway, thank you very much, Your Honour. Thank you, Attorney Lewis. Thank you, Your Honour. Yes, I'd like to address that the IRS code allows what the appellees want to do through federal consolidated reporting method. The definition of a business organization and the business profits tax forbids the use of the federal consolidated reporting method. It says the use of consolidated returns as defined in the United States Internal Revenue Code is not permitted within the definition of business organization. So it fences out exactly what the appellees want to do. The DRA's order below recognized that. The Superior Court's order did not recognize that. In 77A64 simply does not say that you calculate the tax base of the combined reporter in a particular way. It doesn't say that at all. And in the Superior Court, you're quite frankly in trying to leverage the calculation into the statute in a way that deviates from the definitions in 77A1. Finally, I would just say, we hear a lot of talk about.

**Justice**: Do you want to call Dairy a red light sign?

**Counsel**: Oh, I'm sorry, I'm covered by red light. Thank you, Your Honour. Thank you very much, Council. The case is submitted.
