# In the Matter of the Liquidation of The Home Insurance Company

- Docket: 2025-0178
- Argument date: 2026-01-27
- Vimeo: https://vimeo.com/1158827236
- Transcript status: machine-generated draft

## Transcript

**Justice**: This is case 2025-0178 in the matter of the liquidation of the home insurance company.

**Counsel**: Thank you, Your Honor. May it please the Court, Joseph Palmore for Century Indemnity Company. I'm happy to wave my three minutes, but I would like with the Court's indulgence to make three quick points up top. First, the Liquidation Act tells us what to do with claims once they are determined to be valid, but that predicate question of claim validity, which is the only one before the Court on this appeal, is decided by common law. So, contract law for a contract claim, tort law for a tort claim, contribution law for a contribution claim. Second, under Black Letter contribution law, and as the liquidator does not dispute, what counts in determining whether an insurer has paid its fair share is actual payment, not nominal liability. And as is also not disputed here, home will never make actual payment in the amount of its fair share. That's the only issue that's before the Court on this appeal, and that disposes of it. Third, all other issues, for instance, whether CIC will be able to establish that it would pay more than its fair share, whether CIC can substantiate its claim, whether that claim could ultimately be used for set off, are not before the Court on this appeal, those are remand issues for future proceedings. The fact that they implicate uncertain future events is expressly contemplated by the Liquidation Act, which allows for contingent claims, and it's a direct result of the claim amendment deadline, which the liquidator successfully imposed, which required all contingent claims, including this one, to be submitted in 2023. So those are my three points, I'm happy to answer any questions, but I'm also happy to start with kind of that first point about the common law. So all claims, the Liquidation Act is analogous to the federal bankruptcy code in this respect. When someone has a claim, whether it's a contract claim, any other claim against the estate, the Liquidation Act is silent on how those claims are to be assessed. If you look up the definition of a creditor in the Liquidation Act, it says someone with a claim. The word claim is not defined, and that is because the Liquidation Act sits on a foundation, that foundation is the common law, and that's what you use to decide whether a claim is valid or not and therefore should be allowed. Now to be sure the legislature can change common law rules if it wants to and if it speaks clearly, it did so in, for instance, Section C36 of the Act, which deals with reinsurance obligations. There was a background common law rule that reinsurance was to be paid only when the seating insurer made a payment and that reinsurance payment was to be made in the actual amount of that payment. The legislature decided to deviate from that background rule of common law in C36 and say in this limited circumstance, the allowed claim amount is going to be going to impose that reinsurance payment obligation on the reinsurer once that claim is allowed. It easily could have done that here with respect to contribution claims. It could have said a contribution claim shall be calculated based on an allowed amount. It didn't do that. Having not made that choice, having not overridden the common law, then we take the common law as we find it. And the common law as we find it bases this fair share analysis on actual payments. The Fireman's Fund case out of the California Court of Appeal is the best example of that. There and insurer. So you disagree with the trial court liberally construing the act because you wouldn't even get to the act.

**Justice**: Is that essentially your argument?

**Counsel**: That's right, Your Honor. The liberal construction of the act and the favored position of policy holders is baked into the structure of the act, particularly the claim priority system. So we don't dispute that we are at sit in a lower tier. We have a claim, a class five claim. And in terms of your argument about the common law, you're essentially saying construction of the act is irrelevant to your interpretation. Exactly right. So just if you had a tort claim, for instance, you wouldn't say we're going to construe the duty of care for a California tort claim liberally consistent with the purposes of the liquidation act. That really wouldn't make any sense. You wouldn't kind of rejigger the elements, the black letter elements of the underlying common law claim to effectuate some broader purpose. Here, too, you look to just the black letter contribution law claims. So in the Fireman's Fund case, that is a great exposition of the black letter law of contribution under California law, which applies here either it or Missouri. But we agree that it doesn't make a difference which one applies. There, an insurer had taken on a promissory note as part of a settlement, the obligation to pay a promissory note. And they said we should get credit for that. Because look, it's a nominal liability. We're on the hook for this promissory note. What the California Court of Appeals said was no, we don't care about nominal liability. What we care about is whether you're actually going to make a payment on that promissory note. And there's no evidence that you will. So economic realities over kind of nominal liabilities is what counts for purposes of a contribution claim. And here, we have- I'd like to go back to your premise that you addressed and that CIC had to file this. And I'm interested in your response to whether the relief granted by RSA 402C 372, which allows claims, late filings to be made after the claim was contingent and became absolute and was filed with us within 30 days.

**Justice**: Why couldn't CIC's claim have been filed pursuant to that statute?

**Counsel**: Well, because we had a hard deadline to make this claim or have it be distinguished. And if you look at the claim form, which is in the record at Appendix 136, it directs us, it says- and it's in bold, eye-tow underline. It says you have to file any actual or potential claim, even if the amount of the claim is presently uncertain. And it says that again on A37. So we had to file this contingent claim, even though you're right, Your Honor, that we didn't know all the specifics of how it might unfold. We put a footnote in on the claim form, that's at Appendix 137, noting that we had to file this claim, we've made an estimate, but it would be subject to further factual development. And there will be, if we were to prevail here, this would go back down. And lots of the stuff that's in the liquidators brief would all be the subject of remand proceedings. There would be fact and expert discovery, there would be actuarial analysis to kind of assess the likely outcomes of this underlying litigation. And so lots of the stuff that the liquidators talking about are factual questions that would be for a later day. They're not reasons to say, as a matter of law, we can't establish our contribution claim. Because going back to your question, Justice Coway, that that's a question of California law and economic reality. And everyone agrees the economic reality is that this claim will never be paid, the home will never pay up to that amount of what all agree is its fair share. Now, again, that's only one aspect of the contribution claim. You agree with us on that, it doesn't mean we win, it doesn't mean we have, ultimately, an allowable contribution claim. We think we do, but we would be put to the test of establishing that on remand. So all we're asking this court to do is to correct what we believe was an error of law. This is a de novo question, the liquidator says it's abuse of discretion. That's not correct. This is a de novo question of the meaning of the liquidation act and the meaning of California law and Missouri law on contribution. And we think that that error should be corrected and the court should hold that we are not just kind of out of the box altogether on this shortfall theory. And once if you agree with us on that, then we go back and there'll be a lot of further proceedings on this question of the contribution claim.

**Justice**: You agree that CIC's contribution claim is equitable in nature?

**Counsel**: It is equitable in nature. You're right, your honor. Then why shouldn't the trial court have taken into account all of the circumstances surrounding how that claim would be processed, including the fact or the litigated, including the fact that we have a liquidation and

**Justice**: the state of the liquidated entity would be affected by the setup? Why inequity, why can't the trial court take that into account?

**Counsel**: Well, it's an equitable claim and then I think we looked at California law to determine what the meets and bounds of equity are with respect to the claim. And another thing that the Fireman's Fund case says is you don't look to the reasons that someone didn't pay their fair share. There's no analysis of relative equity or comparative fault.

**Justice**: What matters is, do you pay less than your fair share?

**Counsel**: And also, but the equities here are established, are built in and baked in to the statute itself. We don't deny that we sit in a lower tier than policy holders. We're not gonna get any distribution on this claim. To the extent that it's gonna be relevant,

**Justice**: it's going to be because of the set off provision, right?

**Counsel**: Now we, again, that's for future proceeding whether we'd be allowed to use that in set off. But that, as this court has held, is a mandatory aspect of the statute. In home two, in 2008, the liquidator stood here and said, because this is equitable, there should be discretion in allowing for set off. And what this court held in home two was no, it's not discretionary. Discretionary, it is a mandatory aspect of the statute. And it has to, when its requirements are satisfied, it applies. And so the legislature made that choice. And so I think what the liquidator in a sense is trying to do here is say, well then, let's move the discretion to the kind of the back end and change the elements of California contribution law. Because we think that this claim will be used as set off. That's a subversion of the mandatory nature of set off under the statute. And in 2009, there was another case that dealt with set off and actually a contribution claim, which CIC did not prevail on. Because one of the exceptions to set off, this court held applied, but the court went out of its way to say, if that exception didn't apply, CIC would have a right to set off under its contribution claim. So that's the mandatory aspect of the statute. And it's well settled, goes back to the Scott versus Armstrong case from the 1890s from the Supreme Court. That provision of New Hampshire law reflects a long settled rule that assets subject to set off are not properly considered part of the estate at all. They kind of sit outside of the estate. And the legislature made the choice to embody that common law rule on set off. But again, set off is for another day and for future proceedings. The only issue here is whether home has paid or will pay its fair share. Whether we can satisfy that one single element of a contribution claim. And for all the reasons that I've submitted, we think we can. Happy to answer any other questions or reserve the rest of my time for rebuttal.

**Justice**: Thank you.

**Counsel**: Attorney Smith. We have pleased the court, Eric Smith with the Insurance Commissioner as liquidator of the Home Insurance Company. This is an insolvency case. Home is insolvent and in liquidation under the New Hampshire insurers Rehabilitation and Liquidation Act. CSE's shortfall argument being presented here today disregards home's insolvency and the effective structure created by the act. The claim that CIC is asserting today only exists because of homes insolvency. Therefore, the act is controlling. Perhaps the best way to see that this claim is a unique insolvency claim is to consider the other kinds of contribution claims that CIC might have whether home is solvent or insolvent. The first would be whereas if CIC were to show that it paid more than its fair share and no claim had been asserted against home. No proof of claim filed by the insured. Then CIC could have a claim saying that I paid part of home's fair share, home paid, nothing, it would have a claim. And that would be the same in insolvency, except it would be loud. The other kind of claim is where CIC would say it paid more than its fair share. Home had settled with the insured, but for what CIC would say is less than home's fair share. Then CIC could have a claim with respect to the increment between whatever home's settlement value was and the fair share. Here, however, what CIC is seeking is to claim an amount within what home concedes, and CIC concedes, and everybody concedes, is home's fair share. Home is allowed the policy, I'll just claim here. And that would be the $24 million. That would be the $24.7 million. And if home were solvent, there would be such a claim because of course, home would be able to pay it. That's acknowledged liability, it's a real liability. Even in the liquidation scheme, as the distribution percentage goes up, more gets paid on that. So this is not a situation like referred to by council where you have a situation where there's a nominal amount being paid in settlement. It's an allowance for the full fair value and it's being distributed as home's assets permit. So do you agree or

**Justice**: disagree that we look to the common law for the definition of claim?

**Counsel**: Well, your honor, we submit this particular claim. The one that is asserted by CSC here is not a matter of California equitable law, rather that it conflicts with the Rehabilitation and Liquidation Act, and therefore should not be permitted. Now, that isn't to say that contribution generally speaking isn't government by California law, that is the case. And for the reason set forth in our brief, we would are content that even if we were to solely get to a matter of common law that it's not simply the question of what is paid by analogy here being drawn as the distribution. But rather it would be a function under the Kaiser Cement case. The court would look to all the facts and circumstances. And those would include, for instance, the fact that home has agreed to its fair share, that it's agreed as the purposes of the contribution are, that each insurer would bear its fair share of the loss. And home is doing that to the possible extent that it can. I mean, home is prohibited by law to make a payment greater than it can to everybody in the policyholder class. So everybody has to be treated equally, that's one of the premises of insolvency. Here CSC presents the question as asking whether home pays less than its fair share, in our view, that assumes away the Insolvency Act, because home can only pay under the Insolvency Act its distribution. We view the question being is whether CIC can have a valid claim against an insolvent insurer that has allowed the policyholders claim for the insurer's fair share. And that's governed by the Act, which does two things here. First of all, it separates liability from payment, you have to have the allowance, and then you have the distributions that are permitted by law, but they're not the same obviously because of the insolvency. Second, the Act provides the set off provision for the use of liabilities in dealings between insolvent entity and outsiders, and it does that in the set off provision, which is the only provision that deals with claims going both ways in the Act. It says that mutual debts and credits shall be set off, that's focusing on liabilities, and the balance only shall be allowed or paid equating allowance and payments. And then the legislature obviously intended this provision to be applied broadly because it says in connection with any proceedings under this chapter. So this, in our view, requires that the relative obligations in an insolvent can be determined based on allowances, not distributions, and this makes sense because it produces the same consequences as the insolvent world. In the insolvent world, home would pay its fair share, CIC would have no contribution claim, and there'd be no set off. In each case, the reinsurance would be collected the same. By contrast, CIC's construction produces the absurd result at home as greater liabilities when it's insolvent than when it was insolvent. This goes to the fair share, the 24.7 that Geron referred to. CIC, you could have an additional 1.6 million, which is 10.97. of the insolvency shortfall, they would tack that liability on so that home would be liable not for 24.7 but for 26.3 million dollars. That's a double liability, and that's contrary to the provisions which limit home's liability to the policy limits and such like as based on set forth in the hypothetical on page 38 of our brief. But understanding that the 24 is already a discounted amount, how is that

**Justice**: truly, you're sort of saying it's double dipping?

**Counsel**: 24 is not a discounted amount, Geron, that is the fair share. That is the home settlement amount, it's recommended amount, it was allowed as a class 2 claim.

**Justice**: But that's lower than, I mean, isn't that a 40% of something?

**Counsel**: No, the 40% would be based on the 24.7. The 40% applies to the 24.7, which would be about 20% applies to the 24.7, which produces an actual distribution amount of at a 40% distribution. Okay, I understand. $9.8 million.

**Justice**: What are the comparative policy limits?

**Counsel**: Your Honor, I don't know the precise limits, but I can say as CIC noted in its papers that the home $24.7 million allowance is only nominally less than the policy limits. Probably reflecting your presence. And to set forth a hypothetical, you can be an analysis that CIC can produce liabilities in excess of policy limits because you're double counting the insolvency shortfall. And this frustrates the purposes of the act. It frustrates the idea that there should be an allocation of unavoidable loss by increasing the loss. The insolvency should not increase the insolvency, which is what CIC's story results in. It also frustrates the purposes of collecting reinsurance about diminution because of the insolvency, because it uses the insolvency to create a claim. Now, CIC has argued that reinsurance is something that should not be considered here, but we think that in the context of the whole circumstances here, it's obviously important. It's the elephant in the room that can't be put in the closet. This whole case is driven by reinsurance. As CIC has pointed out, the CIC's claim is of a lower priority, class 5, and therefore would not receive any distributions based upon the available assets at home because there will be any distributions to class 5 creditors. The liquidator in the ordinary course isn't even reviewing determining class 5 claims. The reason to do so here is because if the claim were valid, it could be used as a set off and thus reduce reinsurance. This case is all about reinsurance. And for that, for the same reason, it would frustrate the purposes of reserving assets for the preferred creditors. But doesn't the statute contemplate that a set off will reduce the assets of the... Yes, but the set off has to be of a valid claim, and that is exactly the dispute here because in our view, in light of the statute, it can't be a valid claim. Obviously, the liquidator disagrees with CIC's view that the only payment is relevant under the equitable contribution of California. And there's really only two things that can be said about the latter part of the issues briefed here. The first is that the point about settlement credits is that there's a remedy for any perceived unfairness that CIC has here. If it believes that it is going to end up paying more than its fair share, it can assert the home settlement, the amount as a settlement credit, and it would not have a contribution claim because it would have received a credit for it. So there's outside of the whole insolvency regime issues here, CIC has a remedy. The second is going to your question, Your Honor, is that in our view, under the Kaiser Cement case, under California law, all the factors, all the circumstances should be considered. One of them would be home insolvency and such like, but we think this matters much more straightforward addressed under the Insolvency Act because the claim we're dealing with here only results from homes insolvency. Do you agree that CIC had to file this claim now, or could CIC wait until its claim is in the words of the statute absolute, a determination that has been made, and under RSA 402C37, CIC could bring that claim

**Justice**: after the deadline set by the liquidator?

**Counsel**: In this case, No, Your Honor, because there's two different deadlines that issue here. One is the initial claim filing deadline to which the late filing provision that you're referring to applies. The second deadline that CIC was referring to is the claim amendment deadline, which was the subject of the most recent decision by the claim amendment deadline, which acted as a firm cutoff. The claim had to be filed by that date or it could not be considered. And so CIC identified a claim here, filed a contingent claim. Of course, the fact that one can file a claim doesn't mean that the claim has valid or has its value. And obviously if we were to be disputing this as a matter of equity, we'd have a lot of disputes about that kind of thing. The CIC would have to show that in fact it would be obligated to the insurer, to the insured, whether by settlement or court judgment or whatever, and then it would have to premise that amount compared to the fair share, compared to its own fair share, that the home's fair share. We're talking about a very complex process. And as a matter of fact, absentee insolvency ordinarily in a contribution claim would not even be right because CIC here, unlike most parties, asserting contribution claims, of course, is taking the position with the insured that it's not liable to be insured. So there's a lot of confusion that would result there. But you're saying that in a liquidation,

**Justice**: the rightness is not a bar to the duplication of this one?

**Counsel**: That's correct. Because otherwise we would be reducing obligations improperly. I would just conclude by saying that the act is to be liberally construed and in our view that bears on the fact there's a frustration of purpose that we've already talked about. And the fact that there is not a particular provision that relates to contribution here is not relevant because we're talking about the general purposes of the act, the general structure of the act, dividing allowance from distribution and the set off to vision addressing claims going both ways. It is, of course, true that a specific statute cannot override a general statute. Excuse me, that specific statute can override a general statute. Let me correct that. But the absence of a specific vision addressing contribution doesn't nullify the otherwise applicable provision.

**Justice**: Thank you.

**Counsel**: A few quick points, Your Honor. Council said that our claim and allowance of our claim conflicts with the act, but he tellingly didn't cite any specific provision of the act that forecloses our claim. He just gestured toward the general purposes of the act, but as we've talked about, the general purposes are completely consistent with our claim. And the legislature has shown it is capable of negating common law rules when it wants to. It did so in C-36. It didn't do so here. A lot of the provisions that council did talk about when he says the act looks at allowed claims generally, that is with respect to, that's the subsequent question of

**Justice**: what do you do with allowed claims? How do they fit into the waterfall? Can they be used for offset?

**Counsel**: But those provisions don't address what it means to be an allowed claim. That's the issue that's before the court here.

**Justice**: Are we a creditor at all?

**Counsel**: If we have an allowed claim, other provisions kick in, but those other provisions don't dictate how you determine whether a claim should be allowed. That's a question of California law. Council said that our claim arises only because of the insolvency. That doesn't distinguish it from many others. You could imagine a breach of contract claim where the home didn't pay out money that was due on a contract. You would have an allowed claim in the total amount that was owed, even though the failure to pay was because of the insolvency. We're not asking for double liability or greater liability than the fair share amount for two reasons. One, there's going to be no distribution on this claim at all because it sits below in the waterfall and it sits in class five, which is going to get no distribution at all. And second, we're talking about actual payments. They're never going to pay that fair share amount as all agree. And then finally, settlement credits. That is something, again, down the road that would be decided if ever in different litigation under different states' laws and other proceedings. And critically, though, that's not a reason the possibility that settlement credits are there isn't a reason to say as a matter of law we can't assert our claim and are not a creditor. And specifically, Council has pointed to no case where kind of like an allowed amount or a nominal settlement amount was used for the basis of a settlement credit, and that's what it would take to kind of make CIC whole here. So I don't think the settlement credit discussion advances the ball at all. Thank you. Thank you, Your Honor. Case submitted and for the record, Chief Justice McDonald was disqualified. Court invites the parties in John Doe 533 versus the Hampshire Department of Health and Services.
